---
layout: post
title: "So what if FFA activity isn’t heritable?"
date: 2018-01-27
categories:
- Opinion
description:
image: https://sammosummo.github.io/images/un-chien-andalou-1929.jpg
image-sm: https://sammosummo.github.io/images/un-chien-andalou-1929-sm.jpg
image-description: "Un Chien Andalou (1929) by Luis Buñuel & Salvador Dalí"
---

Many people are familiar with the nearly 20-year-old debate about whether the fusiform face area (FFA) is truly selective for faces, or whether it is selective for anything we can discriminate expertly. Recently, I came across a curious new argument in this debate.

In an arXiv pre-print[<sup>1</sup>], Isabel Gauthier writes ‘The claim [that the FFA is face-selective] also lacks more direct support, as […] face-selective activity in FFA does not appear to be heritable’. I tried to pick out a pithy quote from the main text which clarified this, but I couldn’t find one.

[<sup>1</sup>]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.07038

Non-heritability of face-selectivity in the FFA is bad for the face hypothesis because, why? I think the point Gauthier is making here is that if the FFA is dedicated to faces only, then its function should be written out immutably within our DNA. You should be able to figure out how someone’s FFA responds to faces, and how it will always do so, from their DNA. If FFA activity is not heritable, then its response to faces is not controlled by DNA, but rather the environmental experiences of the individual (i.e., their expertise).

I really doubt FFA activity is actually not heritable. Perhaps it is fair to say that we can’t reject the hypothesis that FFA activity isn’t heritable at a conventional significance level based on the available data, but that’s probably because FFA activity is just weakly heritable.

How heritable would we reasonably expect FFA activity to be? Heritability estimates are a function of measurement error: the more measurement error, the lower the estimated heritability. For example, the heritability of IQ, a score derived from average performance on multiple cognitive tests, is generally higher than the heritability of performance on the individual tests, partly because some measurement noise is smoothed out by averaging.

We know that fMRI is really noisy. I’m not familiar with the test-retest reliability for FFA activity in a typical face-localizer task, but as an example, Brandt et al.[<sup>2</sup>] found that test-retest reliability across several contrasts was *at best* 0.45. That might be OK if you are performing a typical fMRI study comparing different conditions using a within-subjects design, but it is truly horrendous for a quantitative phenotype. Therefore, I would predict FFA activity — or activity of any particular brain region in any contrast, for that matter — to have very weak heritability. Obviously, weak heritability means lots of subjects are needed to reject the null hypothesis. fMRI is expensive, so it wouldn’t surprise me if we end up waiting a long time before a study or consortium comes along with a big enough sample to declare FFA activity heritable.

[<sup>2</sup>]: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00163 "Brandt, D. J., Sommer, J., Krach, S., Bedenbender, J., Kircher, T., Paulus, F. M., & Jansen, A. (2013). Test-retest reliability of fMRI brain activity during memory encoding. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 4:163."

It sounds like Gauthier expects heritability of FFA activity to be similar to heritability of performance on a facial detection/recognition task. In my view this is unfair, because 99% of the time, the data from a properly designed and well-understood behavioral task with a decent number of trials will be much cleaner than the data from an fMRI contrast, and therefore will have a higher heritability due to having less measurement error.

On the flip-side, would strongly heritable FFA activity provide support for the face hypothesis? Not really, because if the ability to gain expertise is under genetic control, the activity of an expertise-sensitive area would be heritable. Thus, whether FFA activity is strongly or weakly heritable is neither here nor there.

I think there are plenty of solid arguments both for and against the expertise hypotheses. However, I strongly feel that the heritability argument is clutching at straws.

