---
layout: post
title: "Another formulation of the working-memory model"
date: 2017-10-15
categories:
- Bayesian
- Psychophysics
description:
image: https://sammosummo.github.io/images/the-persistence-of-memory-1931.jpg
image-sm: https://sammosummo.github.io/images/the-persistence-of-memory-1931.jpg
image-description: "The Persistence of Memory (1931) by Salvador Dalí"
---

In a [previous post](https://sammosummo.github.io/2017/10/07/wm-model/), I presented a model for measuring working-memory (WM) capacity from change-detection tasks. Here, I present an alternative formulation of that same model.

The difference between the two formulations is how they deal with covariates. In the first formulation, all covariates are considered to be *fixed effects* — each one has a single coefficient which determines the size of the effect on each subject’s data. In this formulation, covariates are considered to be *random effects*. This means that each subject has their own coefficient for each covariate; in other words, the effect size of a given covariate is random — not fixed —  across subjects. Subject-specific coefficients are drawn from a parent, group-level distribution. The subject-level coefficients and the parameters of the group-level distributions are all estimated together, and mutually inform one another. It makes the most sense to use this kind of Bayesian hierarchical random-effects model on *repeated-measures* data, wherein each subject completes each condition in the experiment.

A very nice feature of the model is that it will deal with missing data naturally. Suppose a subject completes all conditions in an experiment except one. This model will still estimate a coefficient for that subject/condition, but because there is no evidence, the posterior distribution of the coefficient simply adopts the shape its of prior, namely the group-level parent distribution it’s drawn from.

I realise that fixed/random effects are terms which are [slightly frowned up by Bayesians](http://andrewgelman.com/2005/01/25/why_i_dont_use/), but I think the meanings are reasonably clear in this context.

I’ve added the second formulation to the [`wmm` GitHub repository](https://github.com/sammosummo/wmm.git).
